What is Java?
Java is a popular high-level,object-oriented programming language that was originally developed by Sun Microsystems and released in 1995. Currently, Java is owned by Oracle, and more than 3 billion devices run Java. Java runs on a variety of platforms, such as Windows, Mac OS, and the various versions ofUNIX. Today Java is being used to develop numerous types of software applications, including desktop apps, mobile apps, web apps, games, and much more.

Java is a general-purpose programming language intended to let programmers Write Once, Run Anywhere (WORA). This means that compiled Java code can run on all platforms that support Java without the need to recompile.
In this tutorial, you will learn everything about Java, starting from basics to advanced concepts such as overview, history, installations, basic input/output, conditional & control statements, arrays, classes, inheritances, method overloading & overriding, exception handling, and many more.



Java First Example
The first example in Java is to print "Hello, World!" on the screen. Let's have a quick look at the first examples in Java programming:

public class MyFirstJavaProgram {

   /* This is my first java program.
    * This will print 'Hello, World!' as the output
    */

   public static void main(String []args) {
      System.out.println("Hello, World!"); // prints Hello, World!
   }
}
Getting Started with Java
Explore the following chapters to get started learning Java programming:

Java - Home
Java - Overview
Java - History
Java - Features
Java Vs. C++
JVM - Java Virtual Machine
Java - JDK vs JRE vs JVM
Java - Hello World Program
Java - Environment Setup
Java - Basic Syntax
Java Basics
Explore the basic topics such as data types, operators, user input, etc.:

Java - Variable Types
Java - Data Types
Java - Type Casting
Java - Unicode System
Java - Basic Operators
Java - Comments
Java - User Input
Java - Date & Time
Java Conditional Statements
Furthermore, in Java, explore the conditional statements to implement the logic and to make decisions based on the conditions:

Java - Decision Making
Java - If-else
Java - Switch
Java Loops and Control Statements
Explore the loops and control statements to learn how to control the execution of the programming logics:

Java - Loop Control
Java - For Loops
Java - For-Each Loops
Java - While Loops
Java - do-while Loops
Java - Break
Java - Continue
 

Java String and Arrays
Explore the following strings and array-related chapters:

Java Strings and String Class
Java - Strings
Java OOPs
Explore the following chapters to learn the object-oriented programming approach in Java:

Java - OOPs Concepts
Java - Object & Classes
Java - Class Attributes
Java - Class Methods
Java - Methods
Java - Variables Scope
Java - Constructors
Java - Access Modifiers
Java - Inheritance
Java - Aggregation
Java - Polymorphism
Java - Overriding
Java - Method Overloading
Java - Dynamic Binding
Java - Static Binding
Java - Instance Initializer Block
Java - Abstraction
Java - Encapsulation
Java Collections and Interfaces
Explore Java interfaces and collections-related chapters:

Java - Interfaces
Java - List Interface
Java - Queue Interface
Java - Map Interface
Java - SortedMap Interface
Java - Set Interface
Java - SortedSet Interface
Java - Iterators
Java - Comparators
Java - Comparable Interface in Java
Java - Collections
Java - Collection Interface
Java Exceptional Handling
Explore the file handling chapters to learn how to create, write, read, and manipulate the files and directories:

Java - Files
Java - Create a File
Java - Write to File
Java - Read Files
Java - Delete Files
Java - Directories
Java - I/O Streams
Java Multithreading
Explore the threading-related chapters to learn to manage multiple threads in Java:

Java - Multithreading
Java - Thread Life Cycle
Java - Creating a Thread
Java - Starting a Thread
Java - Joining Threads
Java - Naming Thread
Java - Thread Scheduler
Java - Thread Pools
Java - Main Thread
Java - Thread Priority
Java - Daemon Threads
Java - Thread Group
Java - Shutdown Hook
Java Practices
Java Quick Guide
Java Interview Questions
Java 8 Interview Questions
Java Online Test
Java Mock Test
Java References
Here, you can find the package, class, and method references −

Java Scanner Class
Java Arrays Class
Java Strings Class
Java Date Class
Java ArrayList Class
Java Vector Class
Java Stack Class
Java PriorityQueue Class
Java LinkedList Class
Java ArrayDeque Class
Java HashMap Class
Java LinkedHashMap Class
Java WeakHashMap Class
Java EnumMap Class
Java TreeMap Class
Java IdentityHashMap Class
Java HashSet Class
Java EnumSet Class
Java LinkedHashSet Class
Java TreeSet Class
Java BitSet Class
Java Dictionary Class
Java Hashtable Class
Java Properties Class
Java Collection Class
Java Array Class
Online Java Compiler
Our Java programming tutorial provides various examples to explain the concepts. To compile and execute the given Java programming examples in your browser itself, we have provided Online Java Compiler. You can edit and run almost all the examples directly from your browser without the need to set up your development environment.

Try to click the icon run button to run the following Java code to print conventional "Hello, World!" using Java Programming.

Below code box allows you to change the value of the code. So, please try to change the value inside println() and run it again to verify the result.

public class MyFirstJavaProgram {

   /* This is my first java program.
    * This will print 'Hello, World!' as the output
    */

   public static void main(String []args) {
      System.out.println("Hello, World!"); // prints Hello, World!
   }
}
Java Features
Java is a feature-rich language. Java is evolving continuously with every update, and updates are coming every six months. Following are some of the main features of the Java language:

Object Oriented: Java is a pure object-oriented language, and everything in Java is an object. Java supports OOPS principles like Inheritance, Encapsulation, Polymorphism, Classes , and so on. Java itself can be extended as well, being based on an object model.
Platform Independent: Java code is platform independent. A Java code is not compiled into machine-specific code; it is compiled into a platform-neutral byte code. This byte code is executed by JVM which runs the code on the underlying platform. This capability makes Java a Write Once Run Anywhere language.
Easy To Learn: Java inherits features from C and C++, and developers can easily learn Java if they know any of the C or C++ languages. Even for someone new to computer languages, Java is very easy to learn from scratch.
Secure: Java is secure by architecture. A developer is not required to directly interact with the underlying memory or operating system. Java provides automatic garbage collection, so developers are not required to worry about memory leaks, management, etc.
Architectural-Neutral: Java byte code can be executed on any kind of processor. JRE automatically handles the code execution on different types of processors.
Portable: A Java code written on a Windows machine can be executed without any code change on MacOS and vice versa. There is no need to make any operating system-specific code changes.
Robust: Java is a very robust language with very strong compile-time error checks, strict type checking, and runtime exception handling.
Multithreading: Java provides inbuilt support for multiprocessing and multithreading. Java provides thread handling, monitors, deadlock handling, racing conditions, etc.
High Performance: Java, although being interpreted, is still very performant. The JIT(Just In Time) compilerhelps in improving performance.
Distributed: Java is designed for distributed systems and is the most popular language for developing internet-based applications as the internet is a distributed environment.
Java Applications
Since Java supports object-oriented features and is platform-independent, it is extensively used in various fields. Listed below are a few areas where Java is used -

Enterprise solutions
Game development
Secured web development
Embedded systems
Mobile application development
Big Data Applications, and many more.
Java Platforms (Editions)
Platforms of Java are divided into four Java editions, which are −

Java SE (Java Standard Edition): It is a standard edition that is used to develop and deploy portable code for desktop and server environments.
Java EE (Java Enterprise Edition): It is an enterprise edition that is used to develop web applications.
Java ME (Java Micro Edition): J2ME is used to develop mobile applications; it is a micro edition of Java.
JavaFx: It is used to develop lightweight user interfaces for rich internet applications.
Java Jobs & Opportunities
Java is very in demand, and all the major companies are recruiting Java programmers to develop their desktop, web, and mobile applications.

Today, a Java programmer with 3-5 years of experience is asking for around $120,000 in an in an annual package, and this is the most demanding programming language in America. Though it can vary depending on the location of the job. Following are the great companies that are using Java and they need good Java programmers:

Google
Microsoft
Facebook
IBM
Amazon
Netflix
Pinterest
Uber
JetBrains
Many more...
So, you could be the next potential employee for any of these major companies. We have developed great learning material for Java that will help you prepare for the technical interviews and certification exams based on Java. So, start learning Java using this simple and effective tutorial from anywhere and anytime, absolutely at your pace.

Why to Learn Java?
Java is a MUST to learn programming language for students and working professionals to become a great software engineer, especially when they are working in the software development domain. If you will conduct a survey about the best programming language around, Java is sure to come up.

Java is a fairly easy programming language to learn, so if you are starting to learn any programming language, then Java could be your great choice. There's also plenty of Java tools that make it easy for developers and beginners to use. There are many other good reasons that make Java the first choice of any programmer:

Java is open source, which means it's available free of cost.
Java is simple and so easy to learn.
Java is much in demand and ensures a high salary.
Java has a large, vibrant community.
Java has powerful development tools.
Java is platform-independent.
Who should Learn Java
This Java tutorial will help both students as well as working professionals who want to develop applications using Java technologies like banking systems, support systems, information systems, websites, mobile apps, personal blogs, etc. We recommend reading this tutorial in the sequence listed in the left-side menu.

Today, Java is one of the most demanding programming languages, and so it has become an essential language to learn for anyone involved in the software application development process, including software developers, software designers, project managers, etc.
